28 blog draft (#1)
lucioleKi/erlang-org: _posts/2025-05-20-highlights-otp-28.md

---
layout: post
title: Erlang/OTP 28 Highlights
tags: erlang otp 28 release
author: Isabell Huang
---

Erlang/OTP 28 is finally here. This blog post will introduce the new
features that we are most excited about.

A list of all changes is found in [Erlang/OTP 28 Readme](https://erlang.org/patches/OTP-28.0).
Or, as always, look at the release notes of the application you are interested in.
For instance:

> [Erlang/OTP 28 - Erts Release Notes - Version 15.0](https://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/erts/notes.html#erts-15.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Erlang/OTP 28 - Erts Release Notes - Version 15.0](https://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/erts/notes.html#erts-16.0).
```

This year's highlights mentioned in this blog post are:

* [Priority Messages](#priority-messages)
* [Improvements of Comprehensions](#comprehension-improvements)
* [Nominal Types](#nominal-types)
* [PCRE2](#pcre2)
* [New `hibernate/0`](#hibernate0)
* [Based Floating Point Literals](#based-floats)
* [Warnings for Use of Old-style Catch](#warn-old-catch)
* [Smarter Error Suggestions](#error-suggestions)
* [Improvements to the Shell](#shell-improvements)

# Priority Messages

Sometimes, it is important for urgent messages to _skip the queue_ and
be read by the receiving process as soon as possible. Erlang/OTP 28 introduces
priority messages, an opt-in mechanism that allows the receiving process
to let certain messages get priority status.

> Previously, all messages are inserted to the end of the message queue of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all messages are inserted to the end of the message queue of
```

to itself in two simple steps. The first step is to create a process alias
using `alias/1`:

````
PrioAlias = alias([priority])
````

This alias can then be distributed to other processes that should be able
to send priority messages to the receiver process. A sender process can
send a priority message by using `erlang:send/3`, passing the `PrioAlias`
as the first argument, and the option `priority` in the option list as
the third argument:

````
erlang:send(PrioAlias, Message, [priority])
````

In this way, messages sent to a priority alias with the `priority` flag will
be inserted before ordinary messages in the message queue. The same process
can still send ordinary messages to the priority alias by not using the
`priority` flag.

It is also possible to send an exit or monitor signal as a priority signal,
like this:

````
exit(PrioAlias, Message, [priority])
````

If the receiver process wants to stop receiving priority messages, it
can do so by deactivating its priority alias:

````
_ = unalias(PrioAlias)
````

After this, no priority message can be sent to the receiver process, because
the priority alias is no longer active. The receiver process can activate

> and deactivate its priority alias again at any time.

Reviewer: What will happen if the other process attempts to send a plain message using the alias? Will the call crash?

Priority messages respect Erlang's existing guarantee: Signals still arrive
in the same order as they are sent, if they arrive at all. This change
only affects where messages are inserted in the queue. Performance-wise,
this feature preserves Erlang's selective receive optimization. There is
no performance penalty for ordinary messages or priority messages.

# Improvements of Comprehensions

Erlang/OTP 28 introduces many useful updates in its comprehensions. All
of them are new language features that have been suggested as [EEPs](https://www.erlang.org/eeps).
Between the release of Erlang/OTP 27 and 28, there were 4 accepted EEPs related
to comprehensions. Features described by two of them are included in Erlang/OTP
28. The other two are postponed to a later release. 

## Strict Generators

Strict generator as described in [EEP 70](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0070)
has been implemented. This language feature aims to improve both expressiveness

> and safety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strict generators as described in [EEP 70](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0070)
aims to improve expressiveness and safety for comprehensions.
```

In OTP 27 and earlier, when the right-hand side expression does not match
the left-hand side pattern in a comprehension generator, the term is ignored
and the evaluation continues on. In the following example, the element
`error` is silently skipped in the comprehension.

````
1> [X ||{ok, X} <- [{ok, 1}, error, {ok, 3}]].
[1,3]
````

This behavior can hide the presence of unexpected elements in the input

> data. In the example above, What if the list should not contain anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data. In the example above, what if the list should not contain anything
```

other than 2-tuples with the first element being `ok`? By using a strict
generator, the comprehension crashes when the pattern-matching fails with
the element `error`.

````
2> [X ||{ok, X} <:- [{ok, 1}, error, {ok, 3}]].
** exception error: no match of right hand side value error
````

Strict generators can be used in list generators (`<:-`), binary generators
(`<:=`), and map generators (`<:-`). In contrast, the previously existing
generators are called _relaxed_ generators.

Using strict generators are not always better than using relaxed generators,
and vise versa. They each have their use cases, and in other cases using
either is fine. Strict generators are useful when consistency within the
data is more important than fault tolerance. On the other hand, relaxed

> generators remain good when you want to skip unmatched data.

Reviewer: I think you should try to rewrite this to be less vague.

> 

Reviewer: Please add an example of a relaxed generator that intentionally skips unwanted elements.

Now you can pick a more fitting tool for the job, without losing the brevity
of comprehensions. It is also a good time to review old code, and see if
strict generators are more fitting in certain places. The compiler team in
OTP has done (that)[https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/9004]. Take a look
if you are curious. 

## Zip Generators

Zip generator as described in [EEP 73](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0073)
has been implemented, making it easier to iterate over multiple lists,

> binaries, or maps in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zip generators as described in [EEP 73](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0073)
makes it easier to iterate over multiple lists,
binaries, or maps in parallel.
```

Erlang's list comprehension extract elements in a nested or cartesian way by default:

````
1> [{X, Y} || X <- [1, 2], Y <- [a, b]].
[{1,a},{1,b},{2,a},{2,b}]
````

Using zip generators `&&`, we can change the default behavior and "zip"
generators together as if using `lists:zip/2`:

````
2> [{X, Y} || X <- [1, 2] && Y <- [a, b]].
[{1,a},{2,b}]
````

Zip generators can be used with lists, binaries, and maps, and can be
mixed freely with all existing generators and filters. Unlike `lists:zip/2`
and `lists:zip/3`, you can zip any number of generators together using
`&&`s. The compiler avoids creating intermediate tuples, yet preserving
the same error behaviors as these helper functions. 

# Nominal Types

Nominal type-checking as described in [EEP 69](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0069)

> has been implemented in Dialyzer. Nominal typing is an alternative type

Reviewer: Rewrite to eliminated "has been implemented". This phrase is fine for release notes, but everything in this blog post is known to be implemented.

is stricter about pattern syntax and catches invalid patterns early. This
makes your regex code safer, at the cost of breaking some old regex patterns.

## Notable Changes:

- Stricter Syntax Validation: For example, `\i`, `\B`, `\8` all result
in errors.

````
% Erlang/OTP 27
1> re:run("AMM", "\\M").
{match,[{1,1}]}

% Erlang/OTP 28
1> re:run("AMM", "\\M").
** exception error: bad argument
     in function  re:run/2
        called as re:run("AMM","\\M")
        *** argument 2: could not parse regular expression
                        unrecognized character follows \ on character 1

````

- Unicode Property Updates: Characters matched by properties using `\p{...}`
may have changed, according to the updated Unicode character property data.

- `re:split/3` with Branch Reset Groups (`(?|...)`): The following example
may evaluate to `[[],"abc",[],[]]` in some interpretations of PCRE and Perl
versions, differing from PCRE2's result.

````
1> re:split("abcabc", "(?|(abc)|(xyz))\\1", [{return, list}]).
[[],"abc",[]]
````

It is worth noting that the internal format produced by `re:compile/2`
has changed in Erlang/OTP 28. It cannot be reused across nodes or OTP versions.

> This upgrade offers better long-term maintainability. On the other hand,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This upgrade offers better long-term maintainability. On the other hand,
```
```suggestion
This upgrade offers better long-term maintainability, but

you may need to test your existing regex code before upgrading.

# New `hibernate/0`

> Erlang/OTP 28 introuces a new `hibernate/0`. This built-in function puts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Erlang/OTP 28 introduces a new `hibernate/0` function. This built-in function puts
```

spawn_all(0) ->
    timer:sleep(1000),
    io:format("Memory usage: ~p~n", [erlang:memory()]),
    timer:sleep(1000),
    io:format("Memory usage after 1s: ~p~n", [erlang:memory()]),
    ok;
spawn_all(N) ->
    spawn(?MODULE, worker, []),
    spawn_all(N-1).
````

Here's the test code for the second scenario. Processes stay idle but they
do not hibernate:

````
-module(benchmark_receive).
-export([worker2/0, spawn_all/1]).

worker2() ->
    receive
        _  -> ok
    end.

spawn_all(0) ->
    timer:sleep(1000),
    io:format("Memory usage: ~p~n", [erlang:memory()]),
    timer:sleep(1000),
    io:format("Memory usage after 1s: ~p~n", [erlang:memory()]),
    ok;
spawn_all(N) ->
    spawn(?MODULE, worker, []),
    spawn_all(N-1).
````

Memory usage is measured by `erlang:memory()` after 1 million processes have
been spawned. For the final result, we take the average of two measurements.

We spawn 1, 10 thousand, 100 thousand, and 1 million processes for both
scenarios. Results are summarized in the following table:

|       | Number of Processes | Memory Used (Mb)
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------
| Hibernated      | 1       | 44.8
| Without `hibernate/0` | 1        | 47.0

> |

Reviewer: The table is not correctly rendered from this point on.

Erlang/OTP 28 extends its floating point syntax to support floating point
literals using any bases, similar to Ada and C99/C++17. This is based on
[EEP-75](https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0075).

In Erlang, you can already write integers in different bases:

````
1> 2#100.
4
2> 3#100.
9
````

Now, you can do the same with floating point numbers:

````
1> 2#0.011.
0.375
2> 3#0.011.
0.14814814814814814
3> 16#0.011#e5.
4352.0
````

Such an exact representation of floating point numbers is especially useful
in code generating tools. With only the base 10 representation, it is difficult
to convert floats from and to other bases without precision loss. With
based literals, you can even preserve bit level precision. For example,
`2#0.10101#e8` represents the exact layout of a binary float.

# Warnings for Use of Old-Style Catch

Erlang/OTP 28 introduces a warning for using the old style `catch Expr`,
instead of `try ... catch ... end`.

The more simplistic `catch Expr` has some subtle behaviors, especially
in corner cases. Those unwanted behaviors can make debugging and maintaining
code containing them more difficult. Using its alternative `try ... catch ... end`
offers better clarity.

> To facilitate the eventual removal of the old-style catch, the compiler
> now has an option `warn_deprecated_catch`. It can be enabled on the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a future release, the use of the old `catch` construct will by default result in compiler warnings, and
possibly removed altogether in the far future.

To facilitate removing usages of the old-style `catch`, the compiler
now has an option `warn_deprecated_catch`. It can be enabled on the project
```

level or the module level, in order to prevent new uses of the old-style
catch.

> On the other hand, if you need to suppress the warning for legacy code. You
> can add the compile option `-compile(nowarn_deprecated_catch).` But this
> is only a temporary solution. `catch Expr` will be completely removed in
> the future. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have added `warn_deprecated_catch` at the project-level, the warning
can be suppressed in individual modules that have not yet been updated by adding the `-compile(nowarn_deprecated_catch)` to them.
```

Here are some common uses of the old style `catch Expr`. We will show how
to replace them with `try ... catch ... end` and briefly explain why it is
a better solution.

_Example 1_: Using `catch Expr` to handle a possible `throw`

````
Result = catch maybe_throw().
````

It can be refactored to the following code:

````
Result = 
    try maybe_throw() of
        Value -> Value
    catch
        throw:Reason -> {throw, Reason}
    end.

> ````

Reviewer: The example should be:

```
esult = 
    try maybe_throw() of
        Value -> Value
    catch
        throw:Reason -> Reason
    end.
```

Using `try ... catch ... end` is better because you know exactly what kind
of exception happened. You can handle it accordingly.

> _Example 2_: Using `catch Expr` to match a specific error
> 
> ````
> {'EXIT',{badarg,_}} = (catch list_to_existing_atom(String))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Example 2_: Using `catch Expr` to match a specific error in a test case

````
{'EXIT',{badarg,_}} = catch list_to_existing_atom(String).
```

````

It can be refactored to the following code:

````

> try list_to_existing_atom(String) of
>     _Value -> should_not_happen
> catch
>     error:badarg -> ok
> end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
try list_to_existing_atom(String) of
    _Value -> error(should_not_happen)
catch
    error:badarg -> ok
end.
```

````

Now the error case behavior does not change. You have more information for
debugging purpose if needed.

Even though in both cases the old `catch Expr` result in shorter code, the
omission of stack trace can cause more debugging problems in the long run.
In addition, `catch Expr` does not benefit from compiler optimizations

> for `try/catch`. Shorter code may not result in better performance, in this
> case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for `try/catch`. Shorter code does not always result in better performance.
```

> The old-style catch will be completely removed in Erlang/OTP 29 or 30. If
> you are still using the old style `catch Expr` in your code, now is a good
> time to start refactoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is likely that the compiler will start generate warnings for the old-style `catch` in Erlang/OTP 29 or 30. If
you are still using the old style `catch Expr` in your code, now is a good
time to start refactoring.
```
